gh-126061: Add PyLong_IsPositive/Zero/Negative() functions (#126065)
python/cpython: Doc/c-api/long.rst

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. c:function:: int PyLong_IsPositive(PyObject *obj)

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is positive.

Reviewer: If you dislike strictly, I suggest:

```suggestion
   Check if the integer object *obj* is positive: greater than zero.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't feel this addition is needed.

But at least this form is less confusing than "strictly positive".  Maybe: "Check if the integer object *obj* is positive, i.e. greater than zero."

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is positive (``obj > 0``).

Reviewer 3: AFAICT, `obj` must *not* be NULL since otherwise it crashes (it's not the same as setting an exception). Other functions in this section mention when an input must not be NULL.

Reviewer 2: I don't think such details are documented for other functions.

But maybe we should add instead the ``NULL`` check (like e.g. PyLong_AsNativeBytes).  IIUC, there is no rule to do so for new functions.

Reviewer 3: > I don't think such details are documented for other functions.

There is: https://docs.python.org/3.14/c-api/long.html#c.PyLong_AsInt32. Those were recently added functions so that's why I suggested continuing specifying whether a NULL is allowed or not.

Reviewer 2: In fact, [PyLong_AsInt32](https://docs.python.org/3.14/c-api/long.html#c.PyLong_AsInt32) doesn't crashes on ``NULL``.  So, ``value must not be NULL`` sentence is slightly redundant: in this case function set an exception and return ``-1`` (exactly as specified right above).

Reviewer 3: Ah, maybe I wasn't clear but *value* in this case is the output buffer which is then dereferenced without a NULL check. It's not the PyObject input. My point was that when we do not expect a NULL value (and don't check for it), we specify it.

Reviewer 4: Generally (unless documented otherwise), the C API has undefined behaviour if you pass in a NULL `PyObject *`. Usually it'll crash. Sometimes we `assert` that it's not NULL: that would probably be best here. But we don't need an `if`.

I advise against adding a note in the docs about NULL, since it could hint (to humans) that one *could* pass NULL to other functions.

`PyLong_AsInt32` is different: there the pointer is an “output argument” that the function fills in. An explicit note makes more sense there. Generally, for many functions like that, it's sometimes useful to run *other* effects of a function without getting the result filled in, and so some functions like this do accept NULL.

Reviewer 3: > I advise against adding a note in the docs about NULL, since it could hint (to humans) that one could pass NULL to other functions.

I see your point here. The alternative is to specify it to other functions explicitly as well. But it's probably better to just do it in one docs PR later if needed. So I don't mind not specifying "do not pass NULL".

Reviewer 2: Ok, no docs changes.  I'll keep this comment unresolved, in case we want handle obj==NULL case in functions as suggested.

>    If *obj* is an instance of :c:type:`PyLongObject` or it's subtype,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   If *obj* is an instance of :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype,
```
(repeated below 2×)

   return ``1`` when it's positive and ``0`` otherwise.  Else set an
   exception and return ``-1``.

   .. versionadded:: next

.. c:function:: int PyLong_IsNegative(PyObject *obj)

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is negative (``obj < 0``).

Reviewer 3: Ditto.

   If *obj* is an instance of :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype,
   return ``1`` when it's negative and ``0`` otherwise.  Else set an
   exception and return ``-1``.

   .. versionadded:: next

.. c:function:: int PyLong_IsZero(PyObject *obj)

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is zero.

Reviewer 3: Ditto.

   .. versionadded:: 3.14

.. c:function:: int PyLong_IsPositive(PyObject *obj)

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is positive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Check if the integer object *obj* is strictly positive.
```

Maybe add:

```
   Check if the integer object *obj* is strictly positive: if *obj* > ``0``.
```

Reviewer 2: I think there is no ambiguity.  Positive is for, well, being strictly positive.  Else we would use something like "nonnegative".

Reviewer: For me, zero is a positive number. "strictly positive" is used in a few places in Python:

```
Modules/_bz2module.c:    /* data_size is strictly positive, but because we repeatedly have to
Modules/_io/bufferedio.c:            "buffer size must be strictly positive");
Modules/_io/textio.c:                        "a strictly positive integer is required");
Modules/zlibmodule.c:    /* data_size is strictly positive, but because we repeatedly have to
Python/gc.c:   objects that can be reached directly from outside must have strictly positive
Python/gc.c:   by the reachable objects (the ones with strictly positive reference count).
Python/sysmodule.c:                        "switch interval must be strictly positive");
```

An alternative is to say "Check if the integer is greater than zero".

Reviewer 2: > For me, zero is a positive number.

Uh, it doubt I'm able to find math source with this meaning.  But a lot for a different opinion:
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/PositiveInteger.html
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/PositiveNumber.html
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer

and
```
$ git grep positive Modules/mathmodule.c Modules/cmathmodule.c|wc -l
11
```

There is another story: whether ``0`` is a *natural* number or not.

Author: I've applied this advice to positive and negative. Maybe that's more appropriate. Maybe `victor` meant it more purely (it's very positive💯).

Reviewer 2: > it's very positive

Also it's very negative:D

Lets just stick with math terminolgy.

Reviewer 2: @rruuaanng, please don't mark unresolved conversations as resolved.

Reviewer 4: IMO, this *is* unambiguous, but if you skim this with an expectation of “*sign bit unset*”, it's easy to not notice. So, I too would prefer being extra clear.

```suggestion
   Check if the integer object *obj* is strictly positive (``obj > 0``).
```

Reviewer 5: @rruuaanng: both Victor and Petr have expressed a clear wish to include the word "strictly". Please consider their advice.

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is strictly positive.

Reviewer 2: It was discussed.  This doesn't make sense.  Just "positive".  Ditto for "negative".

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is positive.
> 
>    On success, return 1 if *obj* is positive, and 0 if it is zero or negative.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Check if the integer object *obj* is positive.

   On success, return 1 if *obj* is positive, and 0 otherwise.
```

>    On failure, return -1 with an exception set.  This function always succeeds
>    if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure if we should include implementation specifics like this. Consider leaving it out. Ditto for the other APIs.

```suggestion
   On failure, return -1 with an exception set.
```

Author: I'm considering this, and my response to this question is perhaps affirmative. Since subclasses of Long are still instances of Long, they represent an extension of the Long class while maintaining its behavior. A crucial insight from this explanation is that it is capable of accepting other subclasses of Long, not just the Long class itself. (I think)

Reviewer 2: Oh, no.  Please keep this;)  Removing reduces API convenience a lot, use cases can't be anymore one-liners.  While we not gain anything at all.  Why the hell checking of the sign might fail for integers?

Reviewer 5: > Oh, no. Please keep this;) Removing reduces API convenience a lot, use cases can't be anymore one-liners. While we not gain anything at all. Why the hell checking of the sign might fail for integers?

I see now that Serhiy's proposal deliberately includes this use-case. Let's keep it.

>    On success, return 1 if *obj* is positive, and 0 otherwise.
> 
>    On failure, return -1 with an exception set.  This function always succeeds
>    if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   On success, return ``1`` if *obj* is positive, and ``0`` otherwise.

   On failure, return ``-1`` with an exception set.  This function always succeeds
   if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.
```

Same suggestion for the 2 functions below.

>    if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.

Reviewer 6: This description creates a false impression that the function can success if the argument is not PyLongObject. I suggest something like: "If obj is an instance of PyLongObject or its subtype, return 1 if obj is positive, and 0 otherwise. If obj is not an instance of PyLongObject or its subtype, set an exception and return -1."

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is positive.
> 
>    On success, return 1 if *obj* is positive, and 0 otherwise.
> 
>    On failure, return -1 with an exception set.  This function always succeeds
>    if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Check if the integer object *obj* is positive.

   If *obj* is an instance of :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype,
   return ``1`` when it's positive and ``0`` otherwise.  Else set an
   exception and return ``-1``.
```
@serhiy-storchaka ?

Author: For this, maybe we should wait for serhiy's reply :)

Reviewer 6: I am fine with this.

Reviewer 2: For me, current wording (but without "strictly") seems fine.  But I'm ok with Serhiy proposal too.

@rruuaanng, please don't mark conversations as "resolved", when they aren't.

>    .. versionadded:: 3.14

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   .. versionadded:: next
```

.. c:function:: int PyLong_IsNegative(PyObject *obj)

>    Check if the integer object *obj* is negative.
> 
>    On success, return 1 if *obj* is negative, and 0 if it is zero or positive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Check if the integer object *obj* is negative.

   On success, return 1 if *obj* is negative, and 0 otherwise.
```

   On failure, return -1 with an exception set.  This function always succeeds
   if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.

>    .. versionadded:: 3.14

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   .. versionadded:: next
```

.. c:function:: int PyLong_IsZero(PyObject *obj)

   Check if the integer object *obj* is zero.

   On success, return 1 if *obj* is zero, and 0 if it is non-zero.

   On failure, return -1 with an exception set.  This function always succeeds
   if *obj* is a :c:type:`PyLongObject` or its subtype.

>    .. versionadded:: 3.14

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   .. versionadded:: next
```
